LIGHTWEIGHT_SETUP.md, before:

# Lightweight Attendance System - Setup Guide

## What Changed ✨

Your attendance system has been **completely redesigned** for **maximum performance** and **minimal overhead**:

### Removed (Heavy Dependencies)
- ❌ React (~42KB) 
- ❌ React Router
- ❌ React Icons
- ❌ face-api.js (~20MB!)
- ❌ Framer Motion
- ❌ All React ecosystem bloat

### Added (Lightweight Alternatives)
- ✅ **Vanilla JavaScript** (no framework)
- ✅ **TensorFlow.js** with COCO-SSD (~30MB model, but much lighter than face-api)
- ✅ **Vite** (ultra-fast bundler, ~3KB)
- ✅ **Native APIs** (Geolocation, MediaDevices)

---

## Bundle Size Comparison

```
OLD System: ~500KB (React + face-api + dependencies)
NEW System: ~150KB (TensorFlow.js + minimal deps)

Reduction: ~70% smaller! 🚀
```

---

## Installation & Setup

### 1. Install Dependencies
```bash
cd test-vite-app
npm install
```

This installs:
- `@tensorflow/tfjs` - ML framework
- `@tensorflow-models/coco-ssd` - Lightweight object detection
- `firebase` - Database (kept from original)
- `chart.js` - Analytics (kept from original)

### 2. Replace HTML File
```bash
# The new lightweight HTML is in index-new.html
# Replace the old one:
cp index-new.html index.html
```

### 3. Update Main Entry Point
The new entry point is `/src/attendance-main.js`

Make sure your `index.html` points to it:
```html
<script type="module" src="/src/attendance-main.js"></script>
```

### 4. Start Development Server
```bash
npm run dev
```

Opens on `http://localhost:5173`

---

## How It Works

### Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Vanilla JavaScript UI              │
│   (attendance-main.js)              │
└──────────────┬──────────────────────┘
               │
        ┌──────┴────────┐
        │               │
   ┌────▼─────┐    ┌───▼──────┐
   │ TensorFlow│    │ Browser  │
   │   .js     │    │  APIs    │
   │  (Object  │    │(Camera,  │
   │Detection) │    │GPS,etc)  │
   └────┬─────┘    └───┬──────┘
        │               │
        └───────┬───────┘
                │
         ┌──────▼──────────┐
         │ Python Backend  │
         │  (Flask)        │
         │ Port 5000       │
         └─────────────────┘
```

### Features

✅ **Camera Feed**
- Real-time person detection using TensorFlow.js COCO-SSD
- Draws bounding boxes around detected persons
- ~200ms detection interval (optimized for performance)

✅ **GPS Location**
- Uses browser Geolocation API
- Optional (but recommended for verification)
- Fails gracefully if not available

✅ **Attendance Marking**
- Captures frame from video stream
- Converts to base64 image data
- Sends to Python backend
- Stores attendance record + image

✅ **Attendance History**
- Loads from backend
- Displays recent records with date/time
- Shows GPS coordinates if available

✅ **Lightweight CSS**
- Minimal animations (no Framer Motion)
- Glass-morphism effects with CSS only
- Mobile responsive design

---

## File Structure

```
test-vite-app/
├── index-new.html              # NEW: Lightweight HTML
├── src/
│   ├── attendance-main.js      # NEW: Main vanilla JS file (~350 lines)
│   ├── index.css               # Global styles
│   └── pages/student/
│       └── Attendance.css       # Reused CSS (compatible!)
├── vite.config.js              # Updated (no React plugin)
└── package.json                # Updated (no React dependencies)
```

---

## Configuration

### User Information
In your app, set user info before using attendance:

```javascript
// Set current user info
window.setUserInfo(
    'user-123',              // userId
    'John Doe',              // userName
    'john@example.com'       // userEmail
);
```

### Backend URL
The system connects to Flask backend at `http://localhost:5000`

If using different port, edit in `attendance-main.js`:
```javascript
const response = await fetch('http://YOUR-SERVER:PORT/api/attendance/save', {
```

---

## Camera Permissions

Users must grant camera permission when first accessing the page.

**If permission denied:**
1. Check browser settings
2. Reload page
3. Grant camera access

**Chrome/Edge:** Settings → Privacy → Camera → Allow for localhost

---

## TensorFlow.js Model

The system uses **COCO-SSD** model which:
- ✅ Detects people/persons
- ✅ Lightweight (~30MB download on first use)
- ✅ Runs locally in browser (no server calls)
- ✅ Works offline after first load
- ✅ Fast inference (~200ms per frame)

Model downloads automatically on first load.

---

## Backend API Integration

### Attendance Save Endpoint
```
POST /api/attendance/save
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "userId": "user-123",
  "userName": "John Doe",
  "email": "john@example.com",
  "timestamp": "2024-02-14T10:30:00",
  "location": {
    "latitude": 28.6139,
    "longitude": 77.2090
  },
  "verified": true,
  "imageData": "data:image/jpeg;base64,..." // NEW
}
```

### What's Stored
- ✅ Attendance JSON record
- ✅ Captured image (saved as .jpg)
- ✅ GPS location data
- ✅ Timestamp

---

## Performance Optimization Tips

### 1. Video Resolution
Currently optimized for 640x480. Adjust if needed:

```javascript
const stream = await navigator.mediaDevices.getUserMedia({
    video: { 
        width: { ideal: 640 },    // ← Adjust here
        height: { ideal: 480 }    // ← Or here
    }
});
```

### 2. Detection Interval
Face detection runs every 200ms. For faster detection:

```javascript
}, 150);  // ← Reduced interval (200ms → 150ms)
```

But this uses more CPU. Balance based on your hardware.

### 3. Image Quality
Image capture quality is set to 0.7 (70%). For higher quality:

```javascript
return tempCanvas.toDataURL('image/jpeg', 0.9);  // 90% quality
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Camera Not Working
```
Error: Permission denied
```
Solution: Grant camera permission in browser settings

### Face Not Detecting
```
Status shows "Face Not Detected"
```
Solutions:
- Ensure good lighting
- Move closer to camera
- Check that model is loaded (check console)

### Model Loading Failed
```
Failed to load detection model
```
The system will fallback to simple capture (still works!):
- Check internet connection (model downloads from CDN)
- TensorFlow.js will still work in fallback mode

### Slow Detection
If detection is slow:
- Reduce video resolution
- Increase detection interval to 300ms
- Close other browser tabs
- Check CPU usage

### Backend Connection Error
```
Failed to mark attendance: Failed to fetch
```
Solutions:
- Ensure Flask server is running: `python server.py`
- Check Python backend is on port 5000
- Check CORS is enabled in Flask
- Check firewall isn't blocking port 5000

---

## Development

### Build for Production
```bash
npm run build
```

Creates optimized bundle in `dist/` folder

### Lint Code
```bash
npm run lint
```

### Preview Production Build
```bash
npm run preview
```

---

## Browser Support

✅ Chrome/Chromium (latest)
✅ Firefox (latest)
✅ Safari (latest)
✅ Edge (latest)

Requirements:
- WebRTC support (getUserMedia)
- Geolocation API
- Canvas API

---

## Memory Usage

**Before (React + face-api):**
- Initial load: ~250MB
- Per camera frame: ~50MB

**After (Vanilla JS + TensorFlow):**
- Initial load: ~80MB
- Per camera frame: ~30MB

**Improvement: ~67% less memory!** 📉

---

## Next Steps

1. ✅ Install dependencies: `npm install`
2. ✅ Replace index.html with index-new.html
3. ✅ Start backend: `python server.py` (in python-backend/)
4. ✅ Start frontend: `npm run dev`
5. ✅ Open browser, test camera

---

## Support & Issues

If you encounter issues:

1. **Check Console** (F12)
2. **Verify Backend** is running on port 5000
3. **Grant Camera Permission**
4. **Check Network** (DevTools → Network tab)
5. **Clear Cache** (Ctrl+Shift+Delete)

---

## Performance Metrics

```
Initial Load Time:    ~2 seconds (was ~5 seconds)
Camera Startup:       ~1 second (was ~2 seconds)
Detection FPS:        4-5 FPS (smooth, was laggy)
Bundle Size:          ~150KB (was ~500KB)
Memory Usage:         ~80MB (was ~250MB)
```

🎉 **Performance increased by 150%!**

---

## FAQ

**Q: Why no React?**
A: React adds 42KB overhead + ecosystem bloat. Vanilla JS is perfect here.

**Q: Will face detection work offline?**
A: After first load, yes! Model caches locally.

**Q: Can I use this on mobile?**
A: Yes! Tested on iOS/Android. Ensure HTTPS for iPhone.

**Q: What if user doesn't grant camera permission?**
A: App shows friendly error, user can try again.

**Q: How do I integrate with my authentication?**
A: Call `window.setUserInfo(uid, name, email)` after login.

---

Made with ❤️ for performance and simplicity!

Commit message:

docs: update LIGHTWEIGHT_SETUP with version header and v2.1 components table

LIGHTWEIGHT_SETUP.md, after:

# Lightweight Attendance System — Setup Guide

> **Version:** 2.1 | **Last Updated:** February 23, 2026  
> Part of the [Assignment Notifier Platform](https://github.com/mrigeshkoyande/Assignment-notifier-)

## What Changed ✨

Your attendance system has been **completely redesigned** for **maximum performance** and **minimal overhead**:

### Removed (Heavy Dependencies)
- ❌ React (~42KB) 
- ❌ React Router
- ❌ React Icons
- ❌ face-api.js (~20MB!)
- ❌ Framer Motion
- ❌ All React ecosystem bloat

### Added (Lightweight Alternatives)
- ✅ **Vanilla JavaScript** (no framework)
- ✅ **TensorFlow.js** with COCO-SSD (~30MB model, but much lighter than face-api)
- ✅ **Vite** (ultra-fast bundler, ~3KB)
- ✅ **Native APIs** (Geolocation, MediaDevices)

---

## Bundle Size Comparison

```
OLD System: ~500KB (React + face-api + dependencies)
NEW System: ~150KB (TensorFlow.js + minimal deps)

Reduction: ~70% smaller! 🚀
```

---

## Installation & Setup

### 1. Install Dependencies
```bash
cd test-vite-app
npm install
```

This installs:
- `@tensorflow/tfjs` - ML framework
- `@tensorflow-models/coco-ssd` - Lightweight object detection
- `firebase` - Database (kept from original)
- `chart.js` - Analytics (kept from original)

### 2. Replace HTML File
```bash
# The new lightweight HTML is in index-new.html
# Replace the old one:
cp index-new.html index.html
```

### 3. Update Main Entry Point
The new entry point is `/src/attendance-main.js`

Make sure your `index.html` points to it:
```html
<script type="module" src="/src/attendance-main.js"></script>
```

### 4. Start Development Server
```bash
npm run dev
```

Opens on `http://localhost:5173`

---

## How It Works

### Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Vanilla JavaScript UI              │
│   (attendance-main.js)              │
└──────────────┬──────────────────────┘
               │
        ┌──────┴────────┐
        │               │
   ┌────▼─────┐    ┌───▼──────┐
   │ TensorFlow│    │ Browser  │
   │   .js     │    │  APIs    │
   │  (Object  │    │(Camera,  │
   │Detection) │    │GPS,etc)  │
   └────┬─────┘    └───┬──────┘
        │               │
        └───────┬───────┘
                │
         ┌──────▼──────────┐
         │ Python Backend  │
         │  (Flask)        │
         │ Port 5000       │
         └─────────────────┘
```

### Features

✅ **Camera Feed**
- Real-time person detection using TensorFlow.js COCO-SSD
- Draws bounding boxes around detected persons
- ~200ms detection interval (optimized for performance)

✅ **GPS Location**
- Uses browser Geolocation API
- Optional (but recommended for verification)
- Fails gracefully if not available

✅ **Attendance Marking**
- Captures frame from video stream
- Converts to base64 image data
- Sends to Python backend
- Stores attendance record + image

✅ **Attendance History**
- Loads from backend
- Displays recent records with date/time
- Shows GPS coordinates if available

✅ **Lightweight CSS**
- Minimal animations (no Framer Motion)
- Glass-morphism effects with CSS only
- Mobile responsive design

---

## File Structure

```
test-vite-app/
├── index-new.html              # NEW: Lightweight HTML
├── src/
│   ├── attendance-main.js      # NEW: Main vanilla JS file (~350 lines)
│   ├── index.css               # Global styles
│   └── pages/student/
│       └── Attendance.css       # Reused CSS (compatible!)
├── vite.config.js              # Updated (no React plugin)
└── package.json                # Updated (no React dependencies)
```

---

## Configuration

### User Information
In your app, set user info before using attendance:

```javascript
// Set current user info
window.setUserInfo(
    'user-123',              // userId
    'John Doe',              // userName
    'john@example.com'       // userEmail
);
```

### Backend URL
The system connects to Flask backend at `http://localhost:5000`

If using different port, edit in `attendance-main.js`:
```javascript
const response = await fetch('http://YOUR-SERVER:PORT/api/attendance/save', {
```

---

## Camera Permissions

Users must grant camera permission when first accessing the page.

**If permission denied:**
1. Check browser settings
2. Reload page
3. Grant camera access

**Chrome/Edge:** Settings → Privacy → Camera → Allow for localhost

---

## TensorFlow.js Model

The system uses **COCO-SSD** model which:
- ✅ Detects people/persons
- ✅ Lightweight (~30MB download on first use)
- ✅ Runs locally in browser (no server calls)
- ✅ Works offline after first load
- ✅ Fast inference (~200ms per frame)

Model downloads automatically on first load.

---

## Backend API Integration

### Attendance Save Endpoint
```
POST /api/attendance/save
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "userId": "user-123",
  "userName": "John Doe",
  "email": "john@example.com",
  "timestamp": "2024-02-14T10:30:00",
  "location": {
    "latitude": 28.6139,
    "longitude": 77.2090
  },
  "verified": true,
  "imageData": "data:image/jpeg;base64,..." // NEW
}
```

### What's Stored
- ✅ Attendance JSON record
- ✅ Captured image (saved as .jpg)
- ✅ GPS location data
- ✅ Timestamp

---

## Performance Optimization Tips

### 1. Video Resolution
Currently optimized for 640x480. Adjust if needed:

```javascript
const stream = await navigator.mediaDevices.getUserMedia({
    video: { 
        width: { ideal: 640 },    // ← Adjust here
        height: { ideal: 480 }    // ← Or here
    }
});
```

### 2. Detection Interval
Face detection runs every 200ms. For faster detection:

```javascript
}, 150);  // ← Reduced interval (200ms → 150ms)
```

But this uses more CPU. Balance based on your hardware.

### 3. Image Quality
Image capture quality is set to 0.7 (70%). For higher quality:

```javascript
return tempCanvas.toDataURL('image/jpeg', 0.9);  // 90% quality
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Camera Not Working
```
Error: Permission denied
```
Solution: Grant camera permission in browser settings

### Face Not Detecting
```
Status shows "Face Not Detected"
```
Solutions:
- Ensure good lighting
- Move closer to camera
- Check that model is loaded (check console)

### Model Loading Failed
```
Failed to load detection model
```
The system will fallback to simple capture (still works!):
- Check internet connection (model downloads from CDN)
- TensorFlow.js will still work in fallback mode

### Slow Detection
If detection is slow:
- Reduce video resolution
- Increase detection interval to 300ms
- Close other browser tabs
- Check CPU usage

### Backend Connection Error
```
Failed to mark attendance: Failed to fetch
```
Solutions:
- Ensure Flask server is running: `python server.py`
- Check Python backend is on port 5000
- Check CORS is enabled in Flask
- Check firewall isn't blocking port 5000

---

## Development

### Build for Production
```bash
npm run build
```

Creates optimized bundle in `dist/` folder

### Lint Code
```bash
npm run lint
```

### Preview Production Build
```bash
npm run preview
```

---

## Browser Support

✅ Chrome/Chromium (latest)
✅ Firefox (latest)
✅ Safari (latest)
✅ Edge (latest)

Requirements:
- WebRTC support (getUserMedia)
- Geolocation API
- Canvas API

---

## Memory Usage

**Before (React + face-api):**
- Initial load: ~250MB
- Per camera frame: ~50MB

**After (Vanilla JS + TensorFlow):**
- Initial load: ~80MB
- Per camera frame: ~30MB

**Improvement: ~67% less memory!** 📉

---

## Next Steps

1. ✅ Install dependencies: `npm install`
2. ✅ Replace index.html with index-new.html
3. ✅ Start backend: `python server.py` (in python-backend/)
4. ✅ Start frontend: `npm run dev`
5. ✅ Open browser, test camera

---

## Support & Issues

If you encounter issues:

1. **Check Console** (F12)
2. **Verify Backend** is running on port 5000
3. **Grant Camera Permission**
4. **Check Network** (DevTools → Network tab)
5. **Clear Cache** (Ctrl+Shift+Delete)

---

## Performance Metrics

```
Initial Load Time:    ~2 seconds (was ~5 seconds)
Camera Startup:       ~1 second (was ~2 seconds)
Detection FPS:        4-5 FPS (smooth, was laggy)
Bundle Size:          ~150KB (was ~500KB)
Memory Usage:         ~80MB (was ~250MB)
```

🎉 **Performance increased by 150%!**

---

## FAQ

**Q: Why no React?**
A: React adds 42KB overhead + ecosystem bloat. Vanilla JS is perfect here.

**Q: Will face detection work offline?**
A: After first load, yes! Model caches locally.

**Q: Can I use this on mobile?**
A: Yes! Tested on iOS/Android. Ensure HTTPS for iPhone.

**Q: What if user doesn't grant camera permission?**
A: App shows friendly error, user can try again.

**Q: How do I integrate with my authentication?**
A: Call `window.setUserInfo(uid, name, email)` after login.

---

## 🆕 v2.1 Updates (February 2026)

The following components were added or improved in v2.1:

| Component | Change |
|-----------|--------|
| `TeacherAttendance.jsx` | New teacher attendance management UI with filters and stats |
| `AttendanceCalendar.jsx` | Photo support and detailed entry modals |
| Camera Preview CSS | Complete UI overhaul for capture flow |
| Dashboard integration | Teacher dashboard now shows attendance summary widget |

To use the teacher attendance page, navigate to `/teacher/attendance` after logging in as a teacher.

---

Made with ❤️ for performance and simplicity!
